# Jarl

Jarl is an [Open Policy Agent](https://www.openpolicyagent.org/) (OPA) evaluator for the JVM and Javascript, written in Clojure(Script).

For the acronym inclined, Jarl was originally an abbreviation for the "JVM Alternative for the Rego Language". While JVM
support is still the number one priority of the project, it isn't the only one. Javascript support, for both the browser
and Node JS, has been made possible by ClojureScript, and it's not unthinkable that more platforms will be added to the
support matrix in the future.

## Usage

Simple example policy compiled to plan by OPA, and executed by Jarl.

**policy.rego**
```rego
package policy

import future.keywords.if
import future.keywords.in

default allow := false

allow if "admin" in input.user.roles
```
```shell
opa build --target plan --entrypoint policy/allow policy.rego
```

We now have a bunde containing the `plan.json` file that we may submit for execution by Jarl!
```shell
lein run bundle.tar.gz --input '{"user": {"roles": ["admin"]}}'
```

Note that the above constitutes a simple flow for development and testing only. Production artifacts, or a fixed API for
integrations, will be here at a later point in time.

## Built-in Functions

While still in an early stage of development, Jarl already supports [most of the built-in functions](doc/builtins.md) 
provided by OPA. Jarl intends not just to support all built-in functions out of the box, but to make it trivial to
implement custom built-in functions for any platform, or even replace existing implementations with custom ones.

## Development

### Testing

#### Unit Tests

* `lein test` to run all Clojure tests
* `lein test :unit` to run the Clojure unit tests
* `lein cljsbuild test unit` to run the ClojureScript unit tests

#### Compliance Tests

Jarl uses plans generated from the "[YAML test suite](https://github.com/open-policy-agent/opa/tree/main/test/cases/testdata)"
of OPA in order to ensure that the result of running a plan via Jarl is the same as it would be when running the
corresponding policy in OPA. This ensures that we stay compliant with at least the documented behavior of OPA. Now,
there are obviously tons of things not tested there, but having more than 1000 tests at least provides some level of
assurance. When encountering behavior which likely differs between OPA and Jarl, it is recommended to consider adding a
test for that to the OPA test suite, and then have it added to Jarl via the [opa-compliance-test](https://github.com/johanfylling/opa-compliance-test)
tool.

In order to run the compliance tests, these must first be **generated**. This process entails taking the JSON files
found under `src/test/resources/compliance` and turning them into Clojure/ClojureScript test cases — a process done by
the [compliance test generator](./src/test/clojure/test/compliance/generator.clj). Running the generator is as easy as
executing the main function in that namespace, which can conveniently be done with:

```shell
lein gen-compliance
```
If you only want to generate tests for a single target, you may optionally provide either `:clj` or `:cljs` as an
argument to the above command.

NOTE that you need only to generate the compliance tests cases when there have been either changes coming in upstream,
or you have added new builtin functions for either target. Once generated, the tests may be run with the
following commands:

* `lein test :compliance` to run the OPA compliance test suite for Clojure
* `lein cljsbuild test compliance` to run the OPA compliance test suite for ClojureScript

#### Benchmarking

This project has limited benchmarking capabilities, and can measure relative performance for both Jarl and OPA over time.
In support of this, there are two commands:

* `lein perf-jarl`: Will benchmark Jarl, appending the results to `perf/jarl-perf.csv`; labeling them with the current git revision and label (if any).

  The `Benchmark Jarl` GitHub action will run this command and create a PR with the result. This action can be run manually but is also run on pushed tags.
* `lein perf-opa`: Will benchmark the OPA version pointed to by the `OPA` environment variable, alternatively the OPA version found on `PATH`. The result is appended to `perf/opa-perf.csv`, with the OPA version as label.
  
  The `Benchmark OPA` GitHub action will run this command and create a PR with the result. This action can be run manually, and takes the OPA version as input parameter.

`perf/perf.html` is a simple Web page that illustrates the data in `perf/jarl-perf.csv` and `perf/opa-perf.csv` in chart form. 
A live version of this page is published [here](https://johanfylling.github.io/jarl/perf/perf.html).

The above benchmarking commands utilize the IR generated by `test/resources/rego/perf/policy.rego`, where a metric is generated for each contained entrypoint/plan.

### Linters

* `lein kibit` to run [kibit](https://github.com/jonase/kibit)
* `lein eastwood` ro run [eastwood](https://github.com/jonase/eastwood)
* `lein clj-kondo --lint src test` to run [clj-kondo](https://github.com/clj-kondo/clj-kondo)

### ClojureScript

Jarl currently has experimental support for ClojureScript as an alternative to Clojure. In order to avoid duplication of
code, we use `.cljc` files and [reader conditionals](https://clojure.org/guides/reader_conditionals) where possible, and
try to use `.clj` (Clojure) and `.cljs` (ClojureScript) files only when a particular namespace relies extensively on
features found in the host system (such as functions related to date and time).

#### Building ClojureScript

To build all targets (`main`, `test`, `compliance`):
```shell
lein cljsbuild once
```
The above command may optionally be followed by the name of one of the targets to build only that. Additionally, if 
you're hacking on ClojureScript for a while, you may prefer `lein cljsbuild auto` to have it automatically build your
code on changes. This is _much_ faster than building once.

#### Running ClojureScript

Running Jarl core:
```shell
node target/cljs-main.js
```
Running unit tests:
```shell
node target/cljs-test.js
```
Running compliance tests:
```shell
node target/cljs-compliance.js
```

#### REPL

https://github.com/nrepl/piggieback

```shell
$ lein repl
user=> (require 'cljs.repl.node)
nil
user=> (cider.piggieback/cljs-repl (cljs.repl.node/repl-env))
To quit, type: :cljs/quit
nil
```

## Logging

Jarl uses [timbre](https://github.com/ptaoussanis/timbre) for logging, with 
[configuration]https://github.com/ptaoussanis/timbre#configuration provided as a regular Clojure(Script) map. This map
may be modified using any of the available methods listed in the docs. The default level is `:warn`, which should not 
log anything unless something unexpected happens.

When running the Clojure tests (`lein test :unit`, `lein test :compliance`), you may change the level provided in the
`project.clj` file under the `:test` profile. For ClojureScript, you'll currently need to modify the level in the
`test.config` namespace before building, as this file is sourced into the cljs tests.

## License

Copyright 2022 Johan Fylling, Anders Eknert

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

       http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
